foreign
welcome to another episode of disaster
cro confidential podcast I'm your host
Sam blonde this is episode eight can't
believe we have made it this far thank
you for being here with me and with us
um today we have another incredible
guest we have Lucas Fox the GM of
startups at brex a company I of course
um know incredibly well I've had the
pleasure of working with Lucas for about
four years prior to my joining Founders
fund Lucas remains at brex where he's
been for almost five years and just an
unbelievable career trajectory Lucas
started in recruiting which I think is
an incredible
um place to start and just incredible
experience for anybody in a leadership
role from there Lucas came into the
sales organization and built out a team
that was focused on selling brex's
second product which was what we call
call brex Cash it's a deposits product
evolved from that role into owning uh
relationship management so as the VP of
relationship management Lucas really
owned Revenue in our customer base
that's actually where we're going to be
spending most of the time today is on a
customer expansion retention preventing
churn those sorts of things and finally
Lucas's current role is um the GM of
startups and the way that brex is
structured they're like two businesses
within the company one is the startup
segment focused on technology startups
and the other is the Enterprise segment
focused on more mature businesses and
Lucas is like the CEO of the startup
segment with that uh long intro my close
friend Lucas it's awesome to see you and
thank you for being here
100 said thank you I've had the pleasure
of working with you like you said for
four years and uh at one point reporting
to you and uh you know a big fan of your
work and excited to be here awesome well
uh we will jump right in
um and as I mentioned in the intro we're
going to be spending most of our time
today focused on uh serving customers
and before we even jump in just to set
in context uh brex was late to the game
on this
um we acquired a bunch of customers and
we had a lot of focus on customer
acquisition and before we knew it we had
hundreds likely thousands of customers
huge upsell or expansion opportunity
within our customer base some customers
starting to churn in very little
attention focused on making customers
successful and uh growing the spend
within our customer base and I think
that that's something that in my
experience is almost universally true
and it happens organically where
um you start focusing go to market
resources on acquiring customers because
you don't have any customers in the
beginning and it just sort of grows from
there where you know marketing resources
are generally demand gen Focus versus
customer marketing a lot of your revenue
or growth resources are focused on
acquiring new customers versus on
expanding Revenue within your customer
base and so I would say especially for
early stage startups oftentimes the
focus on making customers successful and
expanding Revenue comes too late and
oftentimes there isn't enough or Aren't
Enough resources that are dedicated to
expanding Revenue mitigating churn
making customers successful when you
look at the potential opportunity there
so with all of that said brex was
certainly in that category we had a ton
of customers a bunch of Revenue and
um not much uh available by by way of
serving and expanding uh Revenue within
this customer base let's start there
um you are the VP of RM you were given
this Mandate of growing Revenue within
our existing customer base there are
really two things that influence Revenue
in the base one is churn and one is this
concept of upsell or expansion where did
you focus first
yeah it's a it's a good question Sam I
feel like I agree with your statement
that most companies invest in this very
late and and brex did do that pretty
late in the journey so the first uh
thing that I did you know when
evaluating whether to start and churn
mitigation or upsell was to just look at
our existing customer base and you know
the nature of our customer base meant
that the majority were fast growing
venture-backed companies
um that we would acquire at an early
stage primarily you know seed stage
series a stage and the nature of these
companies are such that they would grow
um a lot throughout their journey and so
we saw that you know about half of the
seed companies that we acquired as
customers would grow into series a
companies and a half of those series a
companies would graduate into series b
and a half of those series B into series
C and this would happen at sort of 12
month intervals so we started to realize
that a customer churning today
um was sort of really bad for the
business because the value of that
customer in the future was greater than
that value uh present day and so the
first thing that I realized was
um we need to just stop churn that was
the number one priority and the first
thing that I really focused on
makes sense and so um brex specific you
you sort of had to pick
um I own both churn and sort of
expansion or or upsell I need to start
somewhere you started focusing on churn
do you believe that that was sort of
unique to brex or do you think that
that's applicable to most startups as
well sort of focus on making your
customers successful in mitigating churn
before you focus on expansion or how do
you think about that
yeah it's it's also a very good question
I definitely think that uh this is
applicable to to other startups as well
I mean I definitely think that you know
when you don't have customers the focus
should be on sales and acquiring
customers but as soon as you start
having customers I think your your
number one priority is making sure those
existing customers are really happy
um and making sure that they do not
leave your platform
um and so I think that churn should be
sort of P0 after you have existing
customers that you can actually
understand and focus on
um and like I said I think a big
Learning lesson for us was I feel like
we invested in this late probably two
years in a year and a half in and I
think that we should have probably done
that right from the beginning and so
um the challenge with some of these high
growth companies like Brax is that user
acquisition net new user acquisition
sort of obfuscates the problems of
customers churning because you're still
growing Revenue a lot month over month
and so despite having churn you don't
pay attention to it but I think that was
a big lesson sort of focus on churn
first and I think that's Universal for
many other startup conscious products
great learning
um okay so you start to focus on churn
um and you've articulated why that's the
priority where do you start
yeah um and I'll try to get pretty
tactical here
um so I think the first step is just
understanding and measuring churn right
because it's very important to first
understand sort of why customers are
churning and if your churn is
regrettable or not regrettable right and
so it's important for you to understand
you know are your customers training
because of a particular feature or
service that is missing and they need or
because something about the product
experience is broken or because it's too
expensive or because you know these are
companies going out of business which
was our case since we served a lot of
startups Etc so it's really important to
understand first like what are the
reasons for churn right that's number
one and then sort of the number two
thing is how does that change depending
on your persona right so for us as an
example we served early stage startups
we started late stage startups we also
serve the founder as the buyer but also
the controller and the CFO the more
later stage that you would go and so
sort of the number one is understanding
churn the reason for churn broken down
by personas
um and really you know this isn't just
about sort of like a one-time exercise
to understand churn sort of the the next
step is sort of setting up the systems
and the processes in place to track
churn moving forward right so this meant
at adding the right fields to our CRM
which we use Salesforce for support reps
and sales reps to input whenever they
knew why a customer was churning
um we also did a lot of sort of
automated surveys whenever we noticed a
customer would stop spending on their
brex card or depositing funds on their
brex cash business account and this was
sort of automated asking customers to
tell us why they were churning
um and whenever we felt like we didn't
know uh why a particular customer had
churned we actually had a team that
would manually audit and study that
customer look through their transaction
history understand their the support
tickets that they had and really sort of
like study and analyze through kind of
like manual uh deep Dives and then tag
that specific churn
um so repeating what I said first step
was understanding and measuring churn
second step is setting up the systems
and processes to do that on a recurring
basis not just on a one-time basis then
the next step that we started really
doing was sharing this throughout the
company so we started to
um write a quarterly memo that would
essentially break down monthly churn
bucketed by Reason by Persona and we
would size what the biggest reasons for
churn would be and ultimately we would
provide a direction to the rest of the
company to the product organization
engineering organization to our support
organizations or operations underwriting
organizations on what we had to do
differently to mitigate that churn right
and so that was kind of like you know
the next step I'd say that the step
after that was we really try to predict
the user behavior that would lead to
churn so in our case as an example you
know we realize that things like you
know your your accounting or Bank
Integrations breaking would lead to a
bad customer experience and would lead
to churn or if your credit limit would
drop that would lead to churn or if you
had more than a certain number of
support cases within 30 days that would
lead to churn or if a user left a low
NPS and we had sort of like a list of
things that we modeled out and realized
led to churn and we built sort of a
churn score so that we could get ahead
and identify the high churn account
before they churned
um and and sort of the final step to
that was really just Staffing a team
that could uh cover a portfolio of
accounts right and so essentially what
we did was
um we built out sort of a coverage model
where some reps had as few as 50
accounts some would have you know as
many as 500 to a thousand accounts and
essentially actually their
responsibility was mitigating churn
getting ahead to prevent uh trend from
happening and ultimately the last step
was sort of like just hiring great
people
um pretty fast to be able to do that
right and so we built sort of a really
great uh interview uh and recruiting
process to your point you know I started
out in recruiting and sort of like hired
hundreds of people during my time at
brex and the one thing that we did that
I think really stuck out as a learning
for for post sales hires for customer
success account management
um was we had this one interview that
would assess a series of core values
right like deep personality traits like
core values and the one that most
correlated to a successful customer
success rep or account manager was
empathy so we we had an interview that
the sole purpose of that interview was
to measure the degree and the level of
empathy that that person had and we only
hired people that had sort of like
extremely high degrees level of empathy
because that made them extremely
customer focused that made them really
care about the customer experience that
made them want to respond to emails at
you know midnight because they didn't
want to disappoint their customer and so
we ultimately realized that like hiring
people with high degrees of empathy was
extremely effective
um and so that's uh that's that's really
interesting I'd say that the last
takeaway was that as a result of doing
this deep dive and understanding and
measuring and fighting churn we realized
a couple of things one of the things
that we realized was that one of the
biggest reasons why customers would
churn was because they weren't properly
set up on brex right so you know they
would sign up to Rex and they would
start using the the brex card they would
deposit some money into our brex
business account
um but they wouldn't really get up and
running and they wouldn't migrate 100 of
their their banking or their corporate
card to brex and we realized that was
actually like the majority
um the number one reason my customers
would ultimately charge because like
they never got set up properly and so as
a result of that we actually decided to
invest in building an implementation
team that would just make sure that
every single customer that signed up
were properly set up
um first guided through people reps then
we really indicated how to do that in a
more self-served product driven way
um but those are kind of like the high
level steps on on what we did first on
churn
mixed on a sense very interesting double
clicking on the last thing that you
touched on which is implementation
because I think it is potentially
universally applicable Beyond just Rex
but was certainly applicable at brex 2.
I remember when we started looking into
data and trying to diagnose
um certain actions or behaviors that
ultimately LED towards like the
long-term success of a customer
um what we found was the first 30 to 60
days was the most critical time period
in a customer's sort of existence on the
platform and if certain actions were
performed the lifetime value of the
customer the sort of stickiness of the
customer was exponentially greater than
if those actions weren't performed and
for brex those things were like
um did they integrate their Erp so were
they mapping the card data back to to
their accounting system
did they issue a certain number of cards
and that certain number of cards was
likely proportional to the total number
of employees that they had did they
migrate a certain number of recurring
subscriptions
um and we found these like Milestones
that ultimately became the framework for
how the implementation team or
implementation reps were measured
um one is revenue based which is what
what is the share of wallet that you are
capturing within this customer in their
first 90 days the second thing is are
these Milestones
um there was like a checklist are these
Milestones being achieved and I think
that the application here is almost
Universal for any startup where you know
at the time that somebody buys the
product it's such a unique time in their
evolution as a customer where are really
investing in making them successful will
pay long-term dividends and there should
be probably some sort of like onboarding
checklist that is tracking some usage
whether it's adding a number of users or
feature functionality usage that um is a
really positive signal in terms of the
long-term success uh stickiness lifetime
value all of these things associated
with customers
um and so Lucas just remind me from day
one did we separate out implementation
to a separate function from relationship
management or how did that evolve
yeah it's a it's a great question and we
did separate it and the reason we
separated was because we saw that the
roles were very different right for for
implementation you know we realized that
uh it was really important to have kind
of like a continuous motion of having
net new customers that were signing up
and you were sort of like incentivized
to drive these specific behaviors that
we built into a scorecard right like
specific number of recurring merchants
and users and making sure that you had
your accounting Erp integration set up
and you know we realized that this uh
would uh be different than kind of like
building a long-term relationship with a
specific customer and really helping
them sort of feel comfortable that they
could scale with brex and and so we
split that out we had an implementation
function but the reason we built the
implementation was because we first
started understanding reasons for turn
and we were and we realized
implementation is one of the ways to
solve terms and so implementation was a
separate team but it it was born as a
result of this Insight that
implementation was the most effective
low-hanging fruit uh path to mitigate
churn and so we had the implementation
side of things and then we had sort of
the the account management relationship
management function and within that
function we bucketed and and sort of
combined churn mitigation and upsell
cross-sell together
um and then as a third part of that
team's Evolution eventually we split out
term mitigation and upsell but we
started out with with both of those
functions together and we can chat a
little bit about that but that was sort
of like the dynamic of the team over
time
makes sense so you inherit this really
large customer base
um you own Revenue within that customer
base you decide first order of business
is making customers successful and um
preventing uh any any more churn that
already exists you start to address that
you focus a lot on the implementation so
the customer's first experience with
brex as a customer
um the like first impression that they
receive uh eventually over time you
start focusing on expansion and upsell
how did you know when to start shifting
some of your attention and resources
towards this concept of expansion and
increasing Revenue
um Beyond just making customers
successful
yeah
um great great question and it's it's
interesting because
um you know we started out as you said
in understanding churn then you know
mitigating some of the churn we set up
implementation and then at some point we
realized that we needed to focus on on
expansion and upsell and you know before
I get into that you know it's important
to know that it you know when we had
that team up and running half of the net
new Revenue that we would bring to Rex
came from net new sales but the other
half came from the existing base and so
you know this was sort of like half of
the new Revenue that we were bringing to
the company right
um so very meaningful the the point that
we realized we needed to start focusing
on upsell and expansion was essentially
as soon as we had a good grasp on churn
so P0 was let's focus on churn let's
understand it let's build the systems
and tools to make sure that on a monthly
basis we're evaluating let's share
learning to the rest of the company
let's make sure that other teams of the
company are doing the right things to
mitigate churn let's build a team to
then address churn and as soon as we had
a good pulse intern and we were tackling
churn we started to organically focus on
expansion and upsell because what we
ultimately realized was that chair
mitigation and upsell were two sides of
the same coin and what I mean by that is
that we realize that you know the
customers that were most likely to churn
were those customers that were still
using other competitor products right so
they were using other credit cards they
were using other bank accounts and we
realized that when we would speak to
these customers they were the most
likely to churn and so as a way to
mitigate the churn we would convince
them and show them the value of
consolidating everything on one platform
on Brax and so we would as a result of
the mitigation of of churn we would
consolidate and bring more card Spencer
bracks and more deposits to Braxton so
that's why I say that this was sort of
like two sides of the same coin we
realized that
um you know upsell and cross-sell is not
just you know a way to bring more
Revenue to the company it's actually a
way to improve the customer experience
because they're consolidating everything
in one place as a result the retention
goes up and obviously the revenue for
that customer also goes up and so that
was kind of like a really important
Insight
um and and you know given that we were
offering a lending product right we were
underwriting customers and offering them
a credit limit our underwriting teams
knew which accounts had multiple
different credit lines because that is a
factor in our underwriting model and so
this really allowed us to narrow down on
the customers that were using other
corporate cards that had other you know
credit lines with other Banks
um and what we could do is focus on
those customers first and make sure that
they understood the value of
consolidating everything on brex
um and so that's a very interesting
Insight sort of like we organically
started to focus on upsell and expansion
because we saw it was a very effective
way to to to mitigate sharing and also a
great way to bring new revenue and as
soon as we started launching new
products we saw that was also the case
right so as soon as we launched our our
business uh account product we found
that customers that had kind of all
their banking needs met with us and
their corporate card needs uh met with
us they would have they had a higher
retention than just card customers and
so that was also one of the reasons why
we you know pushed the the the business
account product to our base it improved
retention but it also obviously brought
a lot of net new revenue and the same
thing happened when we launched Empower
or expense management software that
competes specifically with expensify and
concur you know we started to more
heavily cross-sell this because one it
uh it increased our share of wallet
right so primarily sort of like t e
spend travel and entertainment spend
that we weren't capturing we would
migrate that over to brex but also we
realized that retention would go up for
those customers because the product
became a lot more sticky and so in
summary we started focusing on upsell as
soon as we had a good pulse on churn and
we saw that cross-selling and upselling
not only led to more more Revenue to the
business but also it improved our
retention
um and so overall using multiple product
Solutions just made the product more
sticky and the customer experience
better so that's why I say that sort of
they come hand in hand
that makes sense and I think a decent
segue and uh at least where my mind goes
next which is around these are often
times
um in fact I I would suggest uh probably
rightfully designed as separate people
or separate functions one is sort of
like a customer success type function
that is focused on things like retention
and NPS just making customers successful
and then the second function is uh
Revenue expansion like a sales person
working within the customer base to
um add additional licenses cross-sell
additional products uh we're the same
people in charge of retention and upsell
to begin with and how do you think about
that uh just as a concept
yeah for sure so initially yes initially
because the priority was turn mitigation
we staffed the team to cover our
existing base but as as I mentioned as a
result of doing that we realized that
one of the most effective ways to
mitigate churn was to drive upselling
and cross-selling of of the products
that we offered and so it started out uh
with the same role so the same rep the
same account manager would oversee churn
mitigation and also upsell and
cross-sell
um and especially for the first year or
so because it was the first time they
were that we were investing in this
function we saw a lot of dividends with
that there were a lot of kind of there
was a lot of opportunity with just
mitigating churn and winning business in
the in the existing base
um and we saw you know uh a lot of
success in having reps do both however
as soon as we started scaling the team
so you know when the team crossed 30 40
people we started to realize that it was
harder to divide territories and and to
you know create a very simple
compensation model
um and also we realized that there was
benefits in splitting out the function
in terms of like the skill sets that
required you to be successful to
mitigate churn versus convince someone
on uh essentially using more of our
products So eventually we split out the
team when we crossed kind of like 30 40
people
um and we had one team of customer
success reps that only focused on churn
and they were sort of like the main
point of contact with the customer uh
and and provided a really high level of
service and whenever an opportunity came
to sell a new product or to increase our
share of wallet with an existing product
we would Loop in a client sales rep and
so the client sales rep were what was
focused only on upsell and cross-sell
and both functions were still under the
same leader but we ultimately realized
that eventually we'd have uh just more
efficiencies by splitting the true the
two roles
um there were different skill sets
compensation was different and
ultimately we realized that that was the
best way to scale but in the beginning I
think uh we wouldn't have been as
successful uh if we hadn't combined that
in the same role so that was sort of
like the learning that makes sense I
think there's there's probably
um a Natural Evolution that takes place
here that is maybe the recommendation
that based off of our experience
um we would come away with and that is
uh initially you have somebody focused
on serving the customer that includes
both mitigating churn making them
successful and also increasing the
revenue
um because especially at an early stage
as a startup having this like concept of
over specialization where you have one
person that's customer success and one
person it's account management or sort
of like upsell uh it makes less sense
for some reasons that you talked through
at a very early stage but as you get
much larger as a business you have more
people in the business this concept of
specialization where you have dedicated
implementation person dedicated success
relationship the face of brex for making
the customer successful long term and
then the money person the person that
when we launch a new product when there
is an opportunity to acquire spend from
a competitor that person that sort of
deploys into the account uh and is the
money person but that probably that that
differentiation or specialization makes
less sense from day one
um when things are just simpler across
the board at a startup
Yeah a hundred percent that's that's
right
um okay so you're in this role I think
for a couple of years
um and you were recently promoted into
this GM role where you're as we
mentioned earlier you're effectively the
CEO of a business unit within brex and
that is startups sort of defined as I
think companies um tech companies that
are under 50 employees is probably the
way that we defined it um around the
time that I left
um are there any interesting learnings
you brought with you from this
experience as VP of RM that make you
more successful in this new role that
you think would be interesting for
Founders potentially out there
um that like you know you have this
unique experience and now you're sort of
founder-like um what are the advantages
that you have because of being the VP of
RM
yeah that's a that's a very good
question and and I would say that for
sure there are a lot of advantages in
learning because you know if you think
about it I went from leading a customer
facing organization focused on
implementation on upsell cross-sell and
Trend mitigation to now overseeing a
group of you know over 100 people across
engineering product design operation
sales marketing Partnerships Etc et
cetera and the number one thing that you
know allowed me to be successful was
just having a better understanding than
anyone else at the company of what the
customer needed right and um you know as
part of my uh mandate you know
overseeing implementation retention
upsell cross-sell
I ended up developing a really really
strong intuition on on three things
primarily the first one is why every
customer why signing up to brex right
and you know not at a superficial level
but at a very deep level you know broken
down by personas you know why we're
Founders signing up for Rex why were
CFOs signing up for brex why were
controllers signing up for brex you know
broken down by company size you know
what's the difference between someone
who is signing up to brex you know who
was a seed founder versus a series a
Founder versus a series C controller and
also by product right why were they
signing up for the card product for you
know our banking product for our spin
management software and so that's number
one sort of understanding why customers
were signing up to Rex number two uh why
customers were leaving brex right and in
the same way broken down by personas by
company size and by product you know why
we're customers leaving and churning
right so developing that intuition
number two and then number three is you
know what did customers love about our
product right what what did each of
these personas broken down by company
sites broken down by product what was
the one thing that they loved the most
about our product and I felt like
because I spent so much time with
customers and I also spent so much time
building the systems and tools to gather
this data in a systematic way and share
this with the company I felt like I just
had a really really strong intuition and
understanding
um and you know having a deep
understanding of these three things
allowed me to step into my GM role and
understand things like what do we need
to solve in the product what are the
things that we need to Double Down On
which customer personas should we be
focusing on to grow the fastest and how
can we position our product based on the
different personas to have the most
growth and so I felt like you know it
was much easier after having spent you
know close to two years just getting
very deep in the trenches with customers
and also something that was really
really effective too was you know I
built relationship with hundreds of
customers over the years right so you
know I have personal relationships with
you know hundreds of founders of all
sorts of companies and CFOs and
controllers and so whenever I wanted to
bounce off ideas or test specific uh
products or you know get opinions on
specific product memos that I would
write
um I would simply share that with with
the group of customers you know sort of
what I started doing is I would write a
memo and I would share with 20 customers
and say hey do you mind reading this and
sharing your your thoughts and I would
also just pick up the phone and text and
call so I I had a really deep
understanding of our customers but I
also had a lot of relationships with a
lot of our customers and one thing
that's helpful as well is that you know
I spend a lot of time with uh customers
in my free time as well right sort of I
spend a lot of time with Founders I
spent lot of time with Finance leaders
because a lot of them are just my
friends and so it helped as well that I
get a lot of energy from spending time
with with our customers and it allows me
to constantly you know bounce off ideas
and refine my understanding of the
customer
um and so that was sort of like a really
really key takeaway uh where I continued
having this deep relationship where I
would still do five calls a week with
customers
um in addition to serving also as an
escalation point for frustrated
customers like to this day I probably
receive like a dozen emails a day of of
customers that reach out to me and and
share sort of an escalation point which
came from my days of overseeing kind of
the account management function so I
have a very good pulse on what's going
on in our customers and ultimately you
know what I did was I started to
translate this to the other uh
engineering and product leaders in my
organization right so the product
managers and Engineering managers that
would uh be working on the startup org
you know I started to do the same thing
it which is essentially like pushed them
to spend more time with customers and
develop the same intuition that I had
right and so one of the things that we
did was sort of centralize uh this
function of helping set up calls for a
lot of the engineers engineering leaders
and product leaders
um so that it we essentially just made
it easy for them to do the right thing
I've noticed this pattern when speaking
to a lot of Founders that a lot of
engineering and product leaders they're
expected to speak to customers but
they're also expected to do the work of
reaching out and finding out the
customer and sort of scheduling the call
with the customer and ultimately because
product managers and engineers and
Engineering managers are so busy they
just don't prioritize that and so one of
the things that we did was we just
decided to make it easy for people to do
the right things which essentially was
having almost uh you know this this
function of scheduling and reaching out
to customers centralized and having PMs
and Engineering managers just show up
and do the calls it was just much easier
for them to just develop this intuition
for what the customer needed and so in
summary you know overseeing the
relationship management account
management function made me the customer
expert and it showed me the value of
being the customer expert and ultimately
that made me spend 10 times more time
with customers until this day if I
hadn't had that experience I would not
be spending as much time with customers
and so I think that's the biggest
learning that I would give to to
Founders and to CEOs is you know just
obsess about your customer and spend a
lot of time with your customers and try
to understand those three things that I
said which is why do customers sign up
why do customers leave and what do they
love about your product
so take away for
um Founders and we've um made the uh
Your Role today is a little bit
analogous to a Founder role
um and so take away for Founders is uh
spend probably more time than you are
today with customers they're a very
valuable learnings and insights that
come from uh that time and
because because of your experience and
what may happen for other Founders and
for other businesses is it can become
ingrained in the culture uh especially
on the technical side PM's engineering
leaders spending more time with
customers
um is so beneficial and manifests in uh
better product and more customer focused
product and it starts with the leader
and so you sort of like set the tone uh
of spending time with customers you
articulate the benefits of doing that
and then that spreads throughout the
rest of the business or at least for the
folks that matter the most
um Lucas it is uh lovely to see you um
you know I'm used to seeing you on these
zooms probably like three or four times
a day in different forums and it's now
been a few months uh so this was great
to catch up
um let's catch up again sometime soon
thank you all that uh joined and are
listening in we'll see you back here uh
in a week or two at the next episode and
have a great rest of the day take care
bye Sam
[Music]